# Design Heuristics (p. 135)

Design heuristics are general guidelines, not recipes! They only help *look for* good characteristics or bad signs of a class design.

## Cohesive Abstraction
A class should be a cohesive module to which the methods belong *together*.
- Generally associated with a single abstraction (like an ADT).
  - should be capturable by a noun or adjective
    - `Stack` or `Comparable`
    - verbs like `print` or `send` should raise a red flag
- Should also think if any items are *missing*
- High cohesion is associated with loose coupling.

## Encapsulation and Information Hiding
A cohesive interface doesn't guarantee a good design.

Data structure should be bundled with associated operations
  - `TicTacToe` might contain many appropriate methods, but what if the `board` is defined in another class?

## Accessors and Mutators
> **Accessor**
> 
> A query method that finds out the runtime state of an object of the class.

> **Mutator**
> 
> A function that changes the state of an object.

> **Command-Query Separation Principle**
> 
> When a class has both accessors and mutators, a clear separation is desirable.
> - accessors should not change object states
> - mutators should make a certain change

## Classes as Data Types
In a typed object-oriented language, a class is a data type.

When a class only has static variables/methods, it deserves a closer look.
  - this is acceptable if a class is meant to only have one instance (Singleton)

## Inheritance
- in a good inheritance relationship, the superclass's methods should be cohesive with those in the subclass.
  - `Stack<E>` and `Vector<E>` do not have cohesive methods.
- will a future change of the superclass affect a subclass?
  - avoid introducing new assumptions that could be broken by a potential superclass change
- overriding may modify the precondition and postcondition of an overridden method and affect current/future clients of the class

## Abstract Properties
Can often be stated in terms of:
  - preconditions
  - postconditions
  - class invariants

If not, the class's intent may be unclear.

Class invariants capture how the constructors and methods (especially mutators and accessors) are related.
  - An accessor's postcondition should reflect no object state change
  - A mutator's postcondition should specify a *specific* object state change