# The SOLID Principles (p. 141)

SOLID is a mnemonic acronym for five agile design principles that are intended to make software design more understandable and adaptable to requirements change. The SOLID principles are a subset of many principles promoted by Uncle Bob.

> **Note:** only the SRP and OCP were covered in class.

## Single Responsibility Principle
> **Single Responsibility Principle**
> 
> A class should have one and *only* one reason to be changed.

- who is the code responsible to?
- who must the design of the code respond to?

This does not apply to bug fixes and refactoring - those are the responsibility of the programmer, not the code.

The SRP is closely related to cohesion and coupling.
  - Cohesion is the degree to which the elements contained in a module belong together, mostly from the functional perspective.
  - The elements in a cohesive module should change *for the same reason*.
    - with 2+ responsibilities in one module, changes to one may impair or inhibit the others
  - well-aligned with separation of concerns (4.1.6)

```java
public class RetirementAccount() {
    public void compileReport();
    public void printReport();
}
```
This class could be changed for
  - the content of the report
  - the format of the report (HTML, XML, etc)

These are separate responsibilities, so should be in separate classes.

## Open-Closed Principle
> **Open-Closed Principle**
> 
> Software modules should be open for extension, but closed for modification.

A subclass may
  - extend a superclass through inheritance (open for extension)
  - override an inherited method **without the need to change or recompile the superclass** (closed for modification)

> **Polymorphic Open-Closed Principle**
> 
> Extension should not result in changes to the source or binary code of the existing superclass **or clients** of the superclass.

### Example: Closed Shape vs. Open Shape (p. 143):
General idea:
  - several classes (`Line`, `Circle`, etc.) extend `Shape`.
  - Some shapes have a `calculateArea()` method, others don't.
  - class `Diagram` has an `ArrayList<Shape>` with the following loop:

```java
for (Shape shape : shapes) {
    if (shape instanceOf Circle)
        totalArea += (Circle) shape.calculateArea();
    else if (shape instanceOf Square)
        totalArea += (Square) shape.calculateArea();
}
```
What if we need to add a new shape?
  - doesn't affect `Shape`
  - **does** affect `Diagram`, a client of `Shape`
    - this violates the OCP

Problem: inadequate classification of `Shape` objects
  - some have area, others don't

Possible solutions:
  - Create separate `ClosedShape` abstract class with `calculateArea()` method
  - Give `Line` calculateArea() method, return 0

When creating a class design that complies with the OCP, it's vital to anticipate likely changes. It allows us to invent an abstraction to protect the change from affecting the existing classes.