# Design By Contract

Design by Contract views the precondition and postcondition of a method as a contract between
  - the method (supplier or server)
  - its callers (clients)

If a client calls the method with the precondition satisfied, then the supplier delivers a final state in which the postcondition is satisfied.
  - client
    - precondition is an obligation
    - postcondition is a right
  - supplier
    - precondition is a right
    - postcondition is an obligation

To correctly apply design by contract, each of the following rules must be observed or the program may behave unexpectedly:

  - [Assumed Precondition Rule](#assumed-precondition-rule)
  - [Pre/Postcondition Violation Rules](#prepostcondition-violation-rules)
  - [Reasonable Precondition Rule](#reasonable-precondition-rule)
  - [Precondition Availability Rule](#precondition-availability-rule)

## Assumed Precondition Rule

Design by Contract adopts the demanding design of the precondition by assuming the precondition *always* holds.

> **The Assumed Precondition Rule (The Non-Redundancy Principle)**
> 
> ---
> 
> The body of a method should not test for its precondition because it is an assumed benefit for the supplier.

In other words, if a call to the method does not satisfy the precondition, the method is not bound by the postcondition.


## Pre/Postcondition Violation Rules

Violation of a pre/postcondition at runtime indicates the existence of a bug.

> **The Precondition Violation Rule**
> 
> ---
> 
> A precondition violation is the manifestation of a bug in the *client* regardless of whether the *post*condition is satisfied or violated.

In other words, if the client does not fulfill its contract, then the supplier is not bound by the postcondition.

```java
// Precondition:  x >= 0
// Postcondition: abs(sqrt(x) * sqrt(x) - x) < epsilon
double sqrt(double x);
```
When `x = -1`, the implementation breaks. Because the client violated the precondition, the *client* code is faulty.

> **The Postcondition Violation Rule**
> 
> ---
> 
> A postcondition violation is the manifestation of a bug in the *supplier* because the supplier did not fulfill its contract.

```java
// Precondition:  letter in 'a'..'z' || 'A'..'Z'
// Postcondition: return true  if letter is a vowel
//                       false otherwise

boolean isVowel(char letter) {
    String vowels = "aiouy" // 'e' is missing
    char ch = Character.toLowerCase(letter);
    return vowels.indexOf(ch) >= 0;
}
```
The call `isVowel('E')` incorrectly returns false. Because the client satisfied the precondition and the server violated the postcondition, the supplier code is faulty.


## Reasonable Precondition Rule

In design by contract, the precondition is meant to clarify which cases the method cannot handle concerning logical requirements.

> **The Reasonable Precondition Rule**
> 
> ---
> 
> Requires that:
> 1. The precondition should appear in the official documentation distributed to authors of clients.
> 2. The need for the precondition should be justified logically in terms of the specification, not for the supplier's convenience of implementation.

```java
public class BankAccount() {
    public BankAccount();
    public deposit(double amount);
}
```
In the class above, should `deposit` accept a negative `amount` to mean withdrawal? Obviously not, because `deposit` and `withdraw` exhibit different behaviors.
  - hi, can I deposit $-100 please?

In this case, a precondition of `amount > 0` would be reasonable.

## Precondition Availability Rule

The precondition must not rely on private variables or methods hidden from the clients.

> **The Precondition Availability Rule**
> 
> ---
> 
> Every client of the method should be able to check for its precondition.
