# Fault Detection Condition

Consider the following function:
```java
boolean pass(int a, int b) {
    if (a >= 0 && b >= 0) {
        int mean = (a - b) / 2; // should be (a + b) / 2
        return mean >= 40;
    } else {
        return false;
    }
}
```

The table below demonstrates three test cases that evaluate incorrectly for different reasons.

<center>

**Ineffective Test Examples**
</center>

| a   | b   | oracle value | constraint unsatisfied |
| --- | --- | ------------ | ---------------------- |
| 90  | -10 | false        | reachability           |
| 90  | 0   | true         | necessity              |
| 100 | 10  | true         | propagation            |

These tests cannot reveal the fault because they do not satisfy the **fault detection condition**. A fault detection condition consists of three constraints:

> **Reachability Constraint**
>
> ---
>
> The test input must be able to reach the faulty statement such that it is executed.
> 
In the example, test #1 exercises the `else` condition so `mean` is never created.

This error holds for any \\(a, b: (a < 0) \vee (b < 0)\\). So the reachability constraint is \\(a \geq 0 \wedge b \geq 0\\).

Test #1 gives \\(b < 0\\), so it does not satisfy the reachability constraint.

> **Necessity Constraint (State Infection)**
>
> ---
>
> The test input must make the faulty statement produce an incorrect intermediate result.

In the example, test #2 gives `(a - b) == (a + b)`, so `mean` is calculated correctly despite the error.

This error holds for any \\((a - b) = (a + b)\\), or \\(b = 0\\), so the necessity constraint is \\(b \neq 0\\).

Test #2 gives \\(b = 0\\), so it does not satisfy the necessity constraint.

> **Propagation Constraint**
>
> ---
>
> The test input must propagate the incorrect intermediate result so that the final result is incorrect and observable.

In the example, test #3 gives `mean == 45`, and since `45 >= 40` both the correct and incorrect implementations return `true`.

There are two options here:
  - \\((a - b) \geq 80 \wedge (a + b) < 80\\). Since \\(a \geq 0 \wedge b \geq 0\\), this is impossible.
  - \\((a - b) < 80 \wedge (a + b) \geq 80\\).

So the propagation constraint is \\((80 - b) < a < (80 + b)\\).

Test #3 gives \\(70 < 100 < 90\\), which is false. So test #3 doesn't satisfy the propagation constraint.

## Fault Detection Condition

These three constraints together form the complete fault detection condition:
\\[
  a \geq 0 \text{ and }\\\\
  b > 0 \text{ and }\\\\
  (80 - b) < a < (80 + b)
\\]

A test case can *only* reveal the fault if it matches this condition.

Note that if the correctness of `mean = (a - b) / 2` and `mean = (a + b) / 2` were flipped, this error condition would still hold.

In reality, we don't know whether code under a given test is faulty. Even if it *is* faulty, we don't know exactly where or in what way. This is an experience game. When a test has demonstrated the presence of a fault, we know the detection condition has been met. A test misses the chance of revealing a fault only because it does not satisfy the detection condition.

## Generating Test Cases
Fault detection conditions can also be used to *generate* test cases or prove functional equivalence. For the above example, we may generate a test, e.g., \\(a = 60, b = 50\\).

- When a test can be generated from the condition, it demonstrates that the two versions are functionally equivalent.
- If the condition is unsatisfiable, the two versions are functionally equivalent.

## Fault Detection Condition Exercise

Consider the following faulty code snippet:

```java
boolean foo(int x, int y) {
    int z;
    if (x > 0) {
        z = x * y;
    } else {
        z = y + y; // Should be y * y
    }
    return z > y;
}
```

1. Can the following test cases reveal the fault? Why or why not?
   - `foo(1, 1)`
     - No, because \\(x > 0\\) only the correct branch is exercised.
     - \\(z > y\\) returns the expected value.
     - Not satisfied: reachability constraint
       - \\(x \leq 0\\)
   - `foo(0, 0)`
     - No. The else branch is exercised, but \\((y + y) = (y \cdot y)\\) for \\(y = 0\\).
     - \\(z > y\\) returns the expected value.
     - Not satisfied: necessity constraint
       - \\((y + y) = (y \cdot y)\\), meaning \\(y \not\in \\{0, 2\\}\\)
   - `foo(0, 2)`
     - No. The else branch is exercised, but \\((y + y) = (y \cdot y)\\) for \\(y = 2\\).
     - \\(z > y\\) returns the expected value.
     - Not satisfied: necessity constraint
       - \\(y \not\in \\{0, 2\\}\\) as above.
   - `foo(0, 3)`
     - No.
       - The else branch is exercised.
       - \\((y + y) = 6 \neq 9 = (y \cdot y)\\), so the intermediate result is incorrect.
       - **However**, because \\(z = 6 > 3 = y\\) the incorrect intermediate result doesn't produce an incorrect and observable final result. \\(z > y\\) returns the expected value.
         - Reworded: both correct and incorrect versions return a correct result.
     - Not satisfied: propagation constraint
       - \\((y + y > y) \not\equiv (y \cdot y > y)\\)
       - Two scenarios:
         - \\(y + y > y\\) and \\(y \cdot y \leq y\\)
           - \\(y > 0\\) and \\(0 \leq y \leq 1\\)
           - So \\(0 < y \leq 1\\).
         - \\(y + y \leq y\\) and \\(y \cdot y > y\\)
           - \\(y \leq 0\\) and \\((y < 0 \text{ or } y > 1)\\)
           - So \\(y < 0\\).
       - Putting these scenarios together reduces to \\(y \leq 1: y \neq 0\\).

2. What is the complete fault detection condition?
     - Reachability Constraint: \\(x \leq 0\\)
     - Necessity Constraint: \\(y \not\in \\{0, 2\\}\\)
     - Propagation Constraint: \\(y \leq 1 : y \neq 0\\)

So the full fault detection condition is:
  - \\(\\{(x, y) : x \leq 0, y \leq 1 : y \neq 0\\}\\)
  - `x <= 0 and y <= 1 and y != 0`.